---
description: Compare magnetic fields of geometrically similar current rings
topics:
  - magnetic field
  - scaling
  - current rings
difficulty: easy
status: solved
interested: false
book: Electricity and Magnetism
chapter: The magnetic field
---

## Problem Statement
Consider two circular rings of copper wire. One ring is a scaled-up version of the other, twice as large in all regards (radius, cross-sectional radius). If currents around the rings are driven by equal voltage sources, how do the magnetic fields at the centers compare?

## Solution

Currents are driven by equal voltages. They're both made from copper, so same resistivity $\rho$ but the overall resistance is changed.

What's the resistance in a wire? Looking at the units

$R = \frac{V}{I} = \frac{\text{Volt}}{\text{coulomb/sec}}$

$\rho = \frac{E}{J} = \frac{\text{Volt/m}}{\text{coulomb/sec}\,\text{m}^2} = \frac{\text{Volt}}{\text{coulomb/sec}}\frac{m^2}{m}$

So dim-analysis hints at $R \sim \rho \frac{L}{A}$

Let's figure it directly. assume $E$ is const across the wire

$$|E| = \frac{V}{L}, V = EL$$
$$|J| = \frac{1}{\rho}|E|$$
$$I = \int J\,dA = 2\pi r J = 2\pi r^2\frac{1}{\rho}E$$

$R = \frac{V}{I} = \frac{EL}{E2\pi r^2/\rho} = \rho \frac{L}{2\pi r^2}$

Anyway, what happens to the resistance after the scaling? Length is double but area is quadrupled so resistance is cut by half i.e.

$R_2 = \frac{1}{2}R_1$

Hence $I_2 = \frac{V}{R_2} = \frac{V}{\frac{1}{2}R_1} = 2\frac{V}{R_1} = 2I_1$

The field from a (infinitesimally thin) ring at the center is

$$\vec{B} = \hat{z}\left(\frac{\mu_0}{4\pi}\int \frac{dl\sin\alpha}{r^2} = \frac{\mu_0 I}{4\pi r^2}\int dl = \frac{\mu_0 I}{2\pi r}\right)$$

So assuming the cross section is negligible compared to the radius from origin we have

$\vec{B}_1 = \hat{z}\frac{\mu_0 I_1}{2\pi r_1}$

$\vec{B}_2 = \hat{z}\frac{\mu_0 I_2}{2\pi r_2} = \hat{z}\frac{\mu_0 2I_1}{2\pi 2r_1} = \hat{z}\frac{\mu_0 I_1}{2\pi r_1}$

The fields are equal!