---
description: "Prove equivalence of two energy expressions using vector calculus"
topics: ["electrostatics", "energy", "vector calculus", "divergence theorem"]
difficulty: "medium"
status: "unsolved"
interested: false
book: "Electricity and Magnetism"
chapter: "The electric potential"
---

## Problem Statement
(a) Prove the identity

$$\nabla \cdot (\phi E) = (∇\phi) \cdot E + \phi \nabla \cdot E$$

by explicitly calculating the various derivatives in Cartesian coordinates.

(b) This identity holds for any scalar function φ and any vector function E. In particular, it holds for the electric potential and field. Use this fact to show that Eqs. (1.53) and (2.32) are equivalent expressions for the energy stored in a charge distribution of finite extent. You will want to apply the divergence theorem with a wisely chosen volume.

 (1.53):
$$U = \frac{\epsilon_0}{2} \int_{\text{entire}\\\text{field}} E^2 dv$$

(2.32):
$$U = \frac{1}{2} \int \rho\phi dv$$
## Solution

(a) $\nabla \cdot \phi\vec{E} = \frac{\partial \phi E_x}{\partial x} + \frac{\partial \phi E_y}{\partial y} + \frac{\partial \phi E_z}{\partial z}$

$= \frac{\partial \phi}{\partial x}E_x + \phi\frac{\partial E_x}{\partial x} + ...$

$= \nabla\phi \cdot \vec{E} + \phi(\nabla \cdot \vec{E})$

(b) We want to show that 1.53 and 2.32 are equivalent for a charge distribution of a finite extent. The hint is to use the divergence theorem:

$\int\vec{E}\cdot d\vec{A} = \int div \vec{E} dv$     $|div \vec{E} = \frac{\rho}{\epsilon_0}$

We can rewrite the identity for $\vec{E} = \nabla\phi$

$\nabla\cdot(\phi\vec{E}) = \vec{E}^2 + \phi div \vec{E}$

and then 2.32 can be written as

$U = \frac{\epsilon_0}{2}\int div \vec{E} \phi dV =$

$= \frac{\epsilon_0}{2}\int(E^2 - \nabla\cdot(\phi\vec{E}))dV$

$= \frac{\epsilon_0}{2}\int \vec{E}^2 dv - \frac{\epsilon_0}{2}\int \nabla\cdot(\phi\vec{E})dV$

Can we show the RHS is 0?

Idea: Take surface where interior supports $\rho$ and potential is fixed

$\vec{E}^2 + \phi\frac{\rho}{\epsilon_0}$

beyond V is fixed.

$\int\nabla\cdot(\phi\vec{E})dV = \int \phi \vec{E}\cdot d\vec{A} = \phi\int \vec{E}\cdot d\vec{A}$
$V$ $v$ $v$

$= \phi\int div \vec{E} dV$
$V$

$= \phi\frac{Q}{\epsilon_0}$

as $r(v)\rightarrow \infty$ $\phi \rightarrow 0$ which means

the LHS has to be zero

Okay, so to summarize. Above shows $\int\nabla\cdot(\phi\vec{E})dv$ is 0, and then the identity after integration is

$0 = -\int E^2 dv + \frac{1}{\epsilon_0}\int \rho\phi dv$